PlanMap v0.3 — Memory and Watching

In one line: PlanMap remembers your project on disk and checks itself every time you save a file.

1. What changes

Right now, PlanMap is a tool you run. You point it at two files and it tells you what's different.

After v0.3, it's a tool that runs. It sits in the background, watches your files, and speaks up the moment something behaves differently.

That's the difference between a checker and a guard.

2. Fix the repo first (30 minutes)

Before any new code, two things are broken for anyone who clones your repo.

No package.json. Nothing runs. npm install has nothing to read, and "type": "module" is missing, so every import fails on line one. Create it with your two dependencies and a few scripts.

Delete requirnments.txt. It's a Python habit, and it's misspelled. Everything in it belongs in package.json — dependencies in dependencies, commands in scripts.

Add .gitignore with node_modules/.

After this, a stranger can clone your repo and run it. That matters when you show it to anyone.

3. The big idea: PlanMap keeps its own memory

You chose not to use git, and that's the right call.

Git only sees commits. But an AI agent changes your code and you keep working — the damage happens long before you commit anything. By the time there's a commit, you've already moved on and forgotten.

So PlanMap remembers by itself. A new folder called .planmap/ holds two files:

File	What it holds	Changes when
baseline.json	the facts you last approved	only when you say so
events.jsonl	one line per real change, forever	every real change

Think of it like a photo and a diary.

baseline.json is a photograph — this is what things looked like when you last said "yes, this is correct."

events.jsonl is a diary — every entry is something that happened, written down and never erased.

The photo gets replaced. The diary never does. That diary is what becomes your project evolution history later.

4. The rule that must not be broken

The watcher never updates the baseline.

Here's what goes wrong if it does:

10:00   You save.                       baseline = throws: 2
10:05   Agent changes throw → return.
        You save.                       ⚠ drift printed
                                        baseline = throws: 0   ← updated
10:06   You save again.                 nothing wrong!

At 10:06, the tool says everything is fine. The problem is gone from the current state. If you weren't watching the terminal at 10:05, you never found out — and you can't find out later.

This is exactly what you criticised in Augment Code. PlanMap surfaces divergence instead of quietly overwriting it. Auto-updating the baseline is quietly overwriting it.

So the baseline moves in only two situations:

The very first scan, when there's nothing there yet
When you run accept — you saying "I've seen it, it's fine"

It's the same idea as git. Your files change all day, but the last commit doesn't move until you commit.

5. Two kinds of memory

The watcher needs to answer two different questions, so it needs two different reference points.

Reference	Question it answers	Where it lives	Who updates it
last seen	what changed just now?	memory only	the watcher, every save
baseline	what's still unresolved?	baseline.json	only init and accept

Both are useful, and they're not the same thing.

last seen gives you the diary entry — the exact change that just happened.

baseline gives you the status — what's still different from what you approved.

6. The commands
bash
node src/cli.js init      # scan the project, write baseline.json
node src/cli.js check     # compare now vs baseline, report, exit 1 if changed
node src/cli.js accept    # approve current state → update baseline
node src/cli.js watch     # auto-check on every save

Build in that order. init and check are nearly the same code — one writes, one reports.

7. Step 1 — Scanning a whole folder

Right now you handle one file. Now you need to walk a directory.

Find every .js file. Skip node_modules, .git, dist, build, coverage.

Skipping node_modules isn't optional. A real project has tens of thousands of files in there. Without the skip, your tool will hang and look broken.

Identity needs the file path

Today an identity looks like this:

getSurvey:function

Across a whole project, three different files could each have a getSurvey. So it becomes:

src/routes/survey.js::getSurvey:function

Use relative paths, always with forward slashes. If you store absolute paths, your baseline.json will be different on every machine, and it breaks the moment a second person clones the repo.

This is the same collision problem you solved inside a single file at v0.1 — just one level up.

Run your duplicate check across the project

You already have it, but it only runs per-file. Run it after scanning everything. That's where a real collision would actually show up.

8. Step 2 — init (write the baseline)

Walk every file, collect declarations, write .planmap/baseline.json.

What to store

Identity, file, kind, and properties. That's it.

What NOT to store

Leave out line numbers and byte offsets.

Why: someone adds a blank line at the top of a file, and every line number below it shifts. Your baseline file would show hundreds of changes for something that means nothing. It would churn in git constantly.

Two small things that save you pain

Add a version number to the file. When v0.4 adds a new property, an old baseline can't be compared to a new one. Without a version, every declaration would suddenly report as changed and you'd spend an hour thinking your parser broke.

Sort by identity before writing. If the order shuffles between runs, git shows a giant diff every time even when nothing changed.

Auto-init

Your idea here was better than mine. Don't force the developer to remember init:

starting up
  ↓
does baseline.json exist?
  ├─ no  → scan everything, write it, say "baseline created"
  └─ yes → load it

One less thing to remember.

9. Step 3 — check

Read the baseline. Re-scan the project. Run your existing diffDeclarations.

Your v0.2 diff works here with no changes. It takes two arrays and doesn't care where they came from. That's the payoff for keeping it pure — you're now reusing it for something you hadn't planned.

Exit with code 1 if anything changed

One line, and it's what makes the tool usable in CI later. A tool that always exits 0 can't be automated. Nothing can act on it.

check must never write the baseline

That's accept's job. See section 4.

10. Step 4 — accept
bash
node src/cli.js accept

Re-scan, overwrite baseline.json with the current state, print what was accepted.

That's all it does today. At v0.4 it grows one condition: refuse to run while an intent is violated.

Print what's being accepted before writing. Silent approval of things the developer didn't read is the same problem in a different shape.

11. Step 5 — watch
bash
npm install chokidar

Watch .js files, ignore node_modules.

Re-check only the saved file

Not the whole project. A full rescan on every save is slow enough to be annoying, and annoying tools get uninstalled in a week.

Two things you must get right

Debounce ~300ms. Editors often fire two or three save events for one save. Wait a moment and only act on the last one.

Only speak on real changes. A developer saves constantly — mid-thought, mid-sentence, out of habit. Most saves change bytes but not behaviour.

Here's the good part: your property extraction is already the filter. You don't need extra logic. If the facts are identical, nothing happens.

That's exactly what parseBody proved at v0.2 — reformatted, comment added, variable renamed, and it reported nothing.

Don't repeat yourself

If the baseline never moves, the same drift would print on every single save. Annoying.

Fix: keep the last thing you printed in memory. Only print when it's different.

save 1  →  throws 2 → 0                  print it
save 2  →  throws 2 → 0                  same as before, stay quiet
save 3  →  throws 2 → 0, params 1 → 2    new info, print it

Memory only. Nothing on disk. About twenty lines.

12. Step 6 — The event log

When a real change happens, append one line to events.jsonl:

json
{"ts":"2026-08-14T10:04:00Z","identity":"src/auth.js::validateScore:function","type":"changed","delta":{"throws":[2,0],"returnsNullish":[0,2]}}

Append only. Never rewrite.

Why JSONL and not JSON: appending is one line of code, and if the process dies mid-write you lose one line instead of corrupting the whole file.

This log is your project's history. Every line is already tied to one specific function — something a git commit never is, because one commit mixes five unrelated changes together.

13. The complete flow
start
  ↓
baseline exists? ── no ──→ scan all files, write baseline
  ↓ yes
load baseline
  ↓
watch files (chokidar, ignore node_modules)
  ↓
file saved → wait 300ms → re-parse that one file
  ↓
facts changed since last seen?
  ├─ no  → do nothing
  └─ yes ↓
         append to events.jsonl
         compare against baseline
         different from what was last printed? → print it

Notice: the baseline is never written inside this loop.

14. Done when

You can do this:

node src/cli.js watch inside ai-developer-survey
It says "baseline created — 214 declarations"
Open a file in your editor
Change a throw to a return null
Save
The terminal names the drift within a second

That's your demo. Live, happening in front of someone — much stronger than showing a log of something from March.

15. The trap to plan for

A renamed file looks like a delete plus an add.

Chokidar reports it as one file removed and one file created. Every declaration in it will report as deleted, then re-added under a new path.

Decide now what you want that to look like. Discovering a wall of red in the middle of a demo is a bad time to find out.

The simplest honest answer for v0.3: report it as-is and write it in the README as a known limitation. Solving it properly needs content matching, which is a v0.4+ problem.

16. Not in v0.3

No plan graph. No intent. No comments. No LLM. No VS Code.

Still just facts in, facts out — remembered this time.

17. Write these in DECISIONS.md

Three lines, while the reasoning is fresh:

The watcher never writes the baseline — auto-updating hides the drift you were trying to catch
Line numbers aren't stored in the baseline — they shift for reasons that don't matter and would churn the file
Relative paths only — absolute paths break the moment a second person clones the repo